docs/pages/access-controls/guides/passwordless.mdx, before:

---
title: "Passwordless"
description: Use passwordless authentication
---

Passwordless takes advantage of [WebAuthn](./webauthn.mdx) to provide
passwordless and usernameless authentication for Teleport.

## Prerequisites

* A Teleport cluster with WebAuthn configured.
  See the [Second Factor: WebAuthn](./webauthn.mdx) guide.
* A hardware device with support for WebAuthn and resident keys, or a Mac with
  biometrics / Touch ID.
* A Web browser with [WebAuthn support](
  https://developers.yubico.com/WebAuthn/WebAuthn_Browser_Support/).
* A signed and notarized `tsh` for Touch ID.
  [Download the macOS tsh installer](../../installation/#macos).

## Step 1/3. Configure WebAuthn

See the [Second Factor: WebAuthn](./webauthn.mdx) guide for an in-depth
explanation of the WebAuthn configuration.

A minimal configuration is shown below:

<ScopedBlock scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}>
<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="Static Config">
    Auth Server `teleport.yaml` file:

    ```yaml
    # snippet from /etc/teleport.yaml:
    auth_service:
      authentication:
        type: local
        second_factor: on
        webauthn:
          rp_id: example.com
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Dynamic resources">
    Create a `cap.yaml` file or get the existing configuration using
    `tctl get cluster_auth_preference`:

    ```yaml
    kind: cluster_auth_preference
    version: v2
    metadata:
      name: cluster-auth-preference
    spec:
      type: local
      second_factor: on
      webauthn:
        rp_id: example.com
    ```

    Update the configuration:

    ```code
    $ tctl create -f cap.yaml
    # cluster auth preference has been updated
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
</ScopedBlock>

<ScopedBlock scope={["cloud"]}>
Create a `cap.yaml` file or get the existing configuration using
`tctl get cluster_auth_preference`:

```yaml
kind: cluster_auth_preference
version: v2
metadata:
  name: cluster-auth-preference
spec:
  type: local
  second_factor: on
  webauthn:
    rp_id: example.com
```

Update the configuration:

```code
$ tctl create -f cap.yaml
# cluster auth preference has been updated
```
</ScopedBlock>

`rp_id` is the public domain of the Teleport Proxy Service, *excluding* protocol
(`https://`) and port number.

A Teleport cluster capable of WebAuthn is automatically capable of passwordless.

## Step 2/3. Register

Register your passwordless device using `tsh`:

```code
$ tsh mfa add
# Choose device type [TOTP, WEBAUTHN, TOUCHID]: webauthn
# Enter device name: bio
# Allow passwordless logins [YES, NO]: yes
# Tap any *registered* security key
# Tap your *new* security key
# MFA device "bio" added.
```

If you are using a hardware device, a passwordless registration will occupy a
resident key slot. Regardless of your device type, passwordless registrations
may also be used for regular MFA.

<Admonition type="tip" title="Important">
If you plan on relying exclusively on passwordless, it's recommended to register
more than one device. A portable hardware device is ideal, as it can be shared
between `tsh`, Web UI, and different computers.
</Admonition>

<Admonition type="tip" title="About Touch ID">
Touch ID registrations are siloed per-application. A Touch ID registration for
`tsh` is different from a registration made from Chrome or Safari. You may
register the same Touch ID device from multiple applications to get passwordless
access in all of them.
</Admonition>

## Step 3/3. Authenticate

Authenticate using your passwordless credential:

```code
$ tsh login --proxy=example.com --auth=passwordless
# Tap your security key
# > Profile URL:        https://example.com
#   Logged in as:       codingllama
#   Cluster:            example.com
#   Roles:              access, editor
#   Logins:             codingllama
#   Kubernetes:         enabled
#   Valid until:        2021-10-04 23:32:29 -0700 PDT [valid for 12h0m0s]
#   Extensions:         permit-agent-forwarding, permit-port-forwarding, permit-pty
```

<Admonition type="tip" title="Passwordless clusters">
A fully passwordless cluster defaults to passwordless logins, making
`--auth=passwordless` unnecessary. See [enable passwordless by default](
#optional-enable-passwordless-by-default).
</Admonition>

<Admonition type="tip" title="Web UI">
Look for the passwordless link in the Web UI.
</Admonition>

## Optional: Enable passwordless by default

Passwordless enthusiasts may enable passwordless by default in their clusters.
Note that this configuration changes Teleport's behavior even for users without
a passwordless device registered, so existing users may need to authenticate
using `tsh login --proxy=example.com --auth=local` in order to get their first
passwordless registration.

To enable passwordless by default, add `connector_name: passwordless` to your
cluster configuration:

<ScopedBlock scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}>
<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="Static Config">
    Auth Server `teleport.yaml` file:

    ```yaml
    auth_service:
      authentication:
        type: local
        second_factor: on
        webauthn:
          rp_id: example.com
        connector_name: passwordless # passwordless by default
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Dynamic resources">
    Create a `cap.yaml` file or get the existing configuration using
    `tctl get cluster_auth_preference`:

    ```yaml
    kind: cluster_auth_preference
    version: v2
    metadata:
      name: cluster-auth-preference
    spec:
      type: local
      second_factor: on
      webauthn:
        rp_id: example.com
      connector_name: passwordless # passwordless by default
    ```

    Update the configuration:

    ```code
    $ tctl create -f cap.yaml
    # cluster auth preference has been updated
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
</ScopedBlock>

<ScopedBlock scope={["cloud"]}>
Create a `cap.yaml` file or get the existing configuration using
`tctl get cluster_auth_preference`:

```yaml
kind: cluster_auth_preference
version: v2
metadata:
  name: cluster-auth-preference
spec:
  type: local
  second_factor: on
  webauthn:
    rp_id: example.com
  connector_name: passwordless # passwordless by default
```

Update the configuration:

```code
$ tctl create -f cap.yaml
# cluster auth preference has been updated
```
</ScopedBlock>

## Troubleshooting

### "Allow passwordless logins" doesn't appear

If you don't see the "Allow passwordless logins" prompt during `tsh mfa add`,
you may be using an older version of `tsh`. Download the latest `tsh` from our
[installation page](../../installation).

### Hardware device not usable

`tsh` only prompts for hardware devices with certain capabilities for
passwordless registrations. If your device isn't blinking it may not be capable
of passwordless logins.

Below is a non-comprehensive list of requirements:

* Device must support WebAuthn (sometimes also called FIDO2 or CTAP2)
* Device must be capable of user verification (biometrics or PIN)
* Device must have PIN set
* Device must have fingerprints enrolled (if biometric). This typically means
  both PIN _and_ fingerprints.

`tsh` relies in an embedded libfido2 to access hardware devices. If you are
running on Linux, you may be missing the necessary udev rules to access your
device. Try following the [installation instructions for libfido2](
https://github.com/Yubico/libfido2#installation), which may provide you the
necessary udev rules.

### Touch ID not usable

If you are having trouble with Touch ID, make sure that you are using the latest
standalone version of `tsh`. [Download the macOS tsh installer](
../../installation/#macos).

Touch ID support requires Macs with the Touch Bar and Secure Enclave. It also
requires macOS >= 10.13 (macOS High Sierra).

You can run the `tsh touchid diag` command to verify requirements. A capable
device and `tsh` binary should show an output similar to the one below:

```code
$ tsh touchid diag
# Has compile support? true
# Has signature? true
# Has entitlements? true
# Passed LAPolicy test? true
# Passed Secure Enclave test? true
# Touch ID enabled? true
```

### Disable passwordless

If you want to forbid passwordless access to your cluster, add `passwordless:
false` to your configuration:

<ScopedBlock scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}>
<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="Static Config">
    Auth Server `teleport.yaml` file:

    ```yaml
    # snippet from /etc/teleport.yaml:
    auth_service:
      authentication:
        type: local
        second_factor: on
        webauthn:
          rp_id: example.com
        passwordless: false # disable passwordless
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Dynamic resources">
    Create a `cap.yaml` file or get the existing configuration using
    `tctl get cluster_auth_preference`:

    ```yaml
    kind: cluster_auth_preference
    version: v2
    metadata:
      name: cluster-auth-preference
    spec:
      type: local
      second_factor: on
      webauthn:
        rp_id: example.com
      passwordless: false # disable passwordless
    ```

    Update the configuration:

    ```code
    $ tctl create -f cap.yaml
    # cluster auth preference has been updated
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
</ScopedBlock>

<ScopedBlock scope={["cloud"]}>
Create a `cap.yaml` file or get the existing configuration using
`tctl get cluster_auth_preference`:

```yaml
kind: cluster_auth_preference
version: v2
metadata:
  name: cluster-auth-preference
spec:
  type: local
  second_factor: on
  webauthn:
    rp_id: example.com
  passwordless: false # disable passwordless
```

Update the configuration:

```code
$ tctl create -f cap.yaml
# cluster auth preference has been updated
```
</ScopedBlock>

Commit message:

Add a brief explanation of resident keys

docs/pages/access-controls/guides/passwordless.mdx, after:

---
title: "Passwordless"
description: Use passwordless authentication
---

Passwordless takes advantage of [WebAuthn](./webauthn.mdx) to provide
passwordless and usernameless authentication for Teleport.

## Prerequisites

* A Teleport cluster with WebAuthn configured.
  See the [Second Factor: WebAuthn](./webauthn.mdx) guide.
* A hardware device with support for WebAuthn and resident keys, or a Mac with
  biometrics / Touch ID.
* A Web browser with [WebAuthn support](
  https://developers.yubico.com/WebAuthn/WebAuthn_Browser_Support/).
* A signed and notarized `tsh` for Touch ID.
  [Download the macOS tsh installer](../../installation/#macos).

## Step 1/3. Configure WebAuthn

See the [Second Factor: WebAuthn](./webauthn.mdx) guide for an in-depth
explanation of the WebAuthn configuration.

A minimal configuration is shown below:

<ScopedBlock scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}>
<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="Static Config">
    Auth Server `teleport.yaml` file:

    ```yaml
    # snippet from /etc/teleport.yaml:
    auth_service:
      authentication:
        type: local
        second_factor: on
        webauthn:
          rp_id: example.com
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Dynamic resources">
    Create a `cap.yaml` file or get the existing configuration using
    `tctl get cluster_auth_preference`:

    ```yaml
    kind: cluster_auth_preference
    version: v2
    metadata:
      name: cluster-auth-preference
    spec:
      type: local
      second_factor: on
      webauthn:
        rp_id: example.com
    ```

    Update the configuration:

    ```code
    $ tctl create -f cap.yaml
    # cluster auth preference has been updated
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
</ScopedBlock>

<ScopedBlock scope={["cloud"]}>
Create a `cap.yaml` file or get the existing configuration using
`tctl get cluster_auth_preference`:

```yaml
kind: cluster_auth_preference
version: v2
metadata:
  name: cluster-auth-preference
spec:
  type: local
  second_factor: on
  webauthn:
    rp_id: example.com
```

Update the configuration:

```code
$ tctl create -f cap.yaml
# cluster auth preference has been updated
```
</ScopedBlock>

`rp_id` is the public domain of the Teleport Proxy Service, *excluding* protocol
(`https://`) and port number.

A Teleport cluster capable of WebAuthn is automatically capable of passwordless.

## Step 2/3. Register

Register your passwordless device using `tsh`:

```code
$ tsh mfa add
# Choose device type [TOTP, WEBAUTHN, TOUCHID]: webauthn
# Enter device name: bio
# Allow passwordless logins [YES, NO]: yes
# Tap any *registered* security key
# Tap your *new* security key
# MFA device "bio" added.
```

If you are using a hardware device, a passwordless registration will occupy a
resident key slot. Resident keys, also called discoverable credentials, are
stored in persistent memory in the authenticator, unlike MFA keys which are
encrypted by the authenticator and stored in the Teleport Auth Server.

Regardless of your device type, passwordless registrations may also be used for
regular MFA.

<Admonition type="tip" title="Important">
If you plan on relying exclusively on passwordless, it's recommended to register
more than one device. A portable hardware device is ideal, as it can be shared
between `tsh`, Web UI, and different computers.
</Admonition>

<Admonition type="tip" title="About Touch ID">
Touch ID registrations are siloed per-application. A Touch ID registration for
`tsh` is different from a registration made from Chrome or Safari. You may
register the same Touch ID device from multiple applications to get passwordless
access in all of them.
</Admonition>

## Step 3/3. Authenticate

Authenticate using your passwordless credential:

```code
$ tsh login --proxy=example.com --auth=passwordless
# Tap your security key
# > Profile URL:        https://example.com
#   Logged in as:       codingllama
#   Cluster:            example.com
#   Roles:              access, editor
#   Logins:             codingllama
#   Kubernetes:         enabled
#   Valid until:        2021-10-04 23:32:29 -0700 PDT [valid for 12h0m0s]
#   Extensions:         permit-agent-forwarding, permit-port-forwarding, permit-pty
```

<Admonition type="tip" title="Passwordless clusters">
A fully passwordless cluster defaults to passwordless logins, making
`--auth=passwordless` unnecessary. See [enable passwordless by default](
#optional-enable-passwordless-by-default).
</Admonition>

<Admonition type="tip" title="Web UI">
Look for the passwordless link in the Web UI.
</Admonition>

## Optional: Enable passwordless by default

Passwordless enthusiasts may enable passwordless by default in their clusters.
Note that this configuration changes Teleport's behavior even for users without
a passwordless device registered, so existing users may need to authenticate
using `tsh login --proxy=example.com --auth=local` in order to get their first
passwordless registration.

To enable passwordless by default, add `connector_name: passwordless` to your
cluster configuration:

<ScopedBlock scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}>
<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="Static Config">
    Auth Server `teleport.yaml` file:

    ```yaml
    auth_service:
      authentication:
        type: local
        second_factor: on
        webauthn:
          rp_id: example.com
        connector_name: passwordless # passwordless by default
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Dynamic resources">
    Create a `cap.yaml` file or get the existing configuration using
    `tctl get cluster_auth_preference`:

    ```yaml
    kind: cluster_auth_preference
    version: v2
    metadata:
      name: cluster-auth-preference
    spec:
      type: local
      second_factor: on
      webauthn:
        rp_id: example.com
      connector_name: passwordless # passwordless by default
    ```

    Update the configuration:

    ```code
    $ tctl create -f cap.yaml
    # cluster auth preference has been updated
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
</ScopedBlock>

<ScopedBlock scope={["cloud"]}>
Create a `cap.yaml` file or get the existing configuration using
`tctl get cluster_auth_preference`:

```yaml
kind: cluster_auth_preference
version: v2
metadata:
  name: cluster-auth-preference
spec:
  type: local
  second_factor: on
  webauthn:
    rp_id: example.com
  connector_name: passwordless # passwordless by default
```

Update the configuration:

```code
$ tctl create -f cap.yaml
# cluster auth preference has been updated
```
</ScopedBlock>

## Troubleshooting

### "Allow passwordless logins" doesn't appear

If you don't see the "Allow passwordless logins" prompt during `tsh mfa add`,
you may be using an older version of `tsh`. Download the latest `tsh` from our
[installation page](../../installation).

### Hardware device not usable

`tsh` only prompts for hardware devices with certain capabilities for
passwordless registrations. If your device isn't blinking it may not be capable
of passwordless logins.

Below is a non-comprehensive list of requirements:

* Device must support WebAuthn (sometimes also called FIDO2 or CTAP2)
* Device must be capable of user verification (biometrics or PIN)
* Device must have PIN set
* Device must have fingerprints enrolled (if biometric). This typically means
  both PIN _and_ fingerprints.

`tsh` relies in an embedded libfido2 to access hardware devices. If you are
running on Linux, you may be missing the necessary udev rules to access your
device. Try following the [installation instructions for libfido2](
https://github.com/Yubico/libfido2#installation), which may provide you the
necessary udev rules.

### Touch ID not usable

If you are having trouble with Touch ID, make sure that you are using the latest
standalone version of `tsh`. [Download the macOS tsh installer](
../../installation/#macos).

Touch ID support requires Macs with the Touch Bar and Secure Enclave. It also
requires macOS >= 10.13 (macOS High Sierra).

You can run the `tsh touchid diag` command to verify requirements. A capable
device and `tsh` binary should show an output similar to the one below:

```code
$ tsh touchid diag
# Has compile support? true
# Has signature? true
# Has entitlements? true
# Passed LAPolicy test? true
# Passed Secure Enclave test? true
# Touch ID enabled? true
```

### Disable passwordless

If you want to forbid passwordless access to your cluster, add `passwordless:
false` to your configuration:

<ScopedBlock scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}>
<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="Static Config">
    Auth Server `teleport.yaml` file:

    ```yaml
    # snippet from /etc/teleport.yaml:
    auth_service:
      authentication:
        type: local
        second_factor: on
        webauthn:
          rp_id: example.com
        passwordless: false # disable passwordless
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Dynamic resources">
    Create a `cap.yaml` file or get the existing configuration using
    `tctl get cluster_auth_preference`:

    ```yaml
    kind: cluster_auth_preference
    version: v2
    metadata:
      name: cluster-auth-preference
    spec:
      type: local
      second_factor: on
      webauthn:
        rp_id: example.com
      passwordless: false # disable passwordless
    ```

    Update the configuration:

    ```code
    $ tctl create -f cap.yaml
    # cluster auth preference has been updated
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
</ScopedBlock>

<ScopedBlock scope={["cloud"]}>
Create a `cap.yaml` file or get the existing configuration using
`tctl get cluster_auth_preference`:

```yaml
kind: cluster_auth_preference
version: v2
metadata:
  name: cluster-auth-preference
spec:
  type: local
  second_factor: on
  webauthn:
    rp_id: example.com
  passwordless: false # disable passwordless
```

Update the configuration:

```code
$ tctl create -f cap.yaml
# cluster auth preference has been updated
```
</ScopedBlock>
